ATOMIC HABITS 

An Easy & Proven Way 
to Build Good Habits & 

Break Bad Ones 

JAMES CLEAR 


Tiny Changes, 
Remarkable 
Results 


AVERY 

an imprint of Penguin Random House 
New York 



A 

AN IMPRINT OF PeNGUIN RaNDOM HoUSE LLC 

375 Hudson Street 
New York, New York 10014 


Copyright © 2018 by James Clear 

Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates 
a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not 
reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and 
allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader. 



While the author has made every effort to provide accurate Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the 
publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur after publication. Further, the 
publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party websites or 

their content. 

Version_l 


a-tom-ic 


e'tamik 

1. an extremely small amount of a thing; the single irreducible unit of a 
larger system. 

2. the source of immense energy or power, 
habit 

'habat 

1. a routine or practice performed regularly; an automatic response to a 
specific situation. 




Contents 


Title Page 

Copyright 

Epigraph 

Introduction: Mv Story 

The Fundamentals 

Why Tiny Changes Make a Bio Difference 

1 The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits 

2 How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice Versa) 

3 How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps 

The 1st Law 

Make It Obyious 

4 The Man Who Didn’t Look Right 

5 The Best Way to Start a New Habit 

6 Motiyation Is Qyerrated: Enyironment Often Matters More 

7 The Secret to Self-Control 

The 2nd Law 

Make It Attractiye 


8 How to Make a Habit Irresistible 

9 The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your Habits 

10 How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad Habits 

The 3rd Law 

Make It Easy 

11 Walk Slowly, but Neyer Backward 

12 The Law of Least Effort 

13 How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two-Minute Rule 

14 How to Make Good Habits Ineyitable and Bad Habits Impossible 

The 4th Law 

Make It Satisfying 

15 The Cardinal Rule of Behayior Change 

16 How to Stick with Good Habits Eyery Day 

17 How an Accountability Partner Can Change Eyerything 

































Advanced Tactics 

How to Go from Being Merely Good to Being Truly Great 

18 The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter and When They Don’t) 

19 The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in Life and Work 

20 The Downside of Creating Good Habits 

Conclusion: The Secret to Results That Last 

A ppendix 

What Should You Read Next? 

Little Lessons from the Four Laws 
How to Apply These Ideas to Business 

How to Apply These Ideas to Parenting 

Acknowledgments 

Notes 

Index 

About the Author 

















Introduction 


My Story 

O N THE FINAL day of my sophomore year of high school, I was hit in 
the face with a baseball bat. As my classmate took a full swing, the 
bat slipped out of his hands and came flying toward me before striking 
me directly between the eyes, I have no memory of the moment of 
impact. 

The bat smashed into my face with such force that it crushed my 
nose into a distorted U-shape. The collision sent the soft tissue of my 
brain slamming into the inside of my skull. Immediately, a wave of 
swelling surged throughout my head. In a fraction of a second, I had a 
broken nose, multiple skull fractures, and two shattered eye sockets. 

When I opened my eyes, I saw people staring at me and running 
over to help. I looked down and noticed spots of red on my clothes. 

One of my classmates took the shirt off his back and handed it to me. I 
used it to plug the stream of blood rushing from my broken nose. 
Shocked and confused, I was unaware of how seriously I had been 
injured. 

My teacher looped his arm around my shoulder and we began the 
long walk to the nurse’s office: across the field, down the hill, and back 
into school. Random hands touched my sides, holding me upright. We 
took our time and walked slowly. Nobody realized that every minute 
mattered. 

When we arrived at the nurse’s office, she asked me a series of 
questions. 

“What year is it?” 

“1998,” I answered. It was actually 2002, 

“Who is the president of the United States?” 

“Bill Clinton,” I said. The correct answer was George W. Bush, 



“What is your mom’s name?” 

“Uh, Um,” I stalled. Ten seconds passed. 

“Patti,” I said casually, ignoring the fact that it had taken me ten 
seconds to remember my own mother’s name. 

That is the last question I remember. My body was unable to handle 
the rapid swelling in my brain and I lost consciousness before the 
ambulance arrived. Minutes later, I was carried out of school and taken 
to the local hospital. 

Shortly after arriving, my body began shutting down. I struggled 
with basic functions like swallowing and breathing. I had my first 
seizure of the day. Then I stopped breathing entirely. As the doctors 
hurried to supply me with oxygen, they also decided the local hospital 
was unequipped to handle the situation and ordered a helicopter to fly 
me to a larger hospital in Cincinnati. 

I was rolled out of the emergency room doors and toward the 
helipad across the street. The stretcher rattled on a bumpy sidewalk as 
one nurse pushed me along while another pumped each breath into me 
by hand. My mother, who had arrived at the hospital a few moments 
before, climbed into the helicopter beside me. I remained unconscious 
and unable to breathe on my own as she held my hand during the 
flight. 

While my mother rode with me in the helicopter, my father went 
home to check on my brother and sister and break the news to them. 
He choked back tears as he explained to my sister that he would miss 
her eighth-grade graduation ceremony that night. After passing my 
siblings off to family and friends, he drove to Cincinnati to meet my 
mother. 

When my mom and I landed on the roof of the hospital, a team of 
nearly twenty doctors and nurses sprinted onto the helipad and 
wheeled me into the trauma unit. By this time, the swelling in my brain 
had become so severe that I was having repeated post-traumatic 
seizures. My broken bones needed to be fixed, but I was in no 
condition to undergo surgery. After yet another seizure—my third of 
the day—I was put into a medically induced coma and placed on a 
ventilator. 

My parents were no strangers to this hospital. Ten years earlier, 
they had entered the same building on the ground floor after my sister 



was diagnosed with leukemia at age three. I was five at the time. My 
brother was just six months old. After two and a half years of 
chemotherapy treatments, spinal taps, and bone marrow biopsies, my 
little sister finally walked out of the hospital happy, healthy, and 
cancer free. And now, after ten years of normal life, my parents found 
themselves back in the same place with a different child. 

While I slipped into a coma, the hospital sent a priest and a social 
worker to comfort my parents. It was the same priest who had met 
with them a decade earlier on the evening they found out my sister had 
cancer. 

As day faded into night, a series of machines kept me alive. My 
parents slept restlessly on a hospital mattress—one moment they 
would collapse from fatigue, the next they would be wide awake with 
worry. My mother would tell me later, “It was one of the worst nights 
I’ve ever had.” 


MY RECOVERY 

Mercifully, by the next morning my breathing had rebounded to the 
point where the doctors felt comfortable releasing me from the coma. 
When I finally regained consciousness, I discovered that I had lost my 
ability to smell. As a test, a nurse asked me to blow my nose and sniff 
an apple juice box. My sense of smell returned, but—to everyone’s 
surprise—the act of blowing my nose forced air through the fractures 
in my eye socket and pushed my left eye outward. My eyeball bulged 
out of the socket, held precariously in place by my eyelid and the optic 
nerve attaching my eye to my brain. 

The ophthalmologist said my eye would gradually slide back into 
place as the air seeped out, but it was hard to tell how long this would 
take. I was scheduled for surgery one week later, which would allow me 
some additional time to heal. I looked like I had been on the wrong end 
of a boxing match, but I was cleared to leave the hospital. I returned 
home with a broken nose, half a dozen facial fractures, and a bulging 
left eye. 

The following months were hard. It felt like everything in my life 
was on pause. I had double vision for weeks; I literally couldn’t see 
straight. It took more than a month, but my eyeball did eventually 
return to its normal location. Between the seizures and my vision 



problems, it was eight months before I could drive a car again. At 
physical therapy, I practiced basic motor patterns like walking in a 
straight line. I was determined not to let my injury get me down, but 
there were more than a few moments when I felt depressed and 
overwhelmed, 

I became painfully aware of how far I had to go when I returned to 
the baseball field one year later. Baseball had always been a major part 
of my life. My dad had played minor league baseball for the St. Louis 
Cardinals, and I had a dream of playing professionally, too. After 
months of rehabilitation, what I wanted more than anything was to get 
back on the field. 

But my return to baseball was not smooth. When the season rolled 
around, I was the only junior to be cut from the varsity baseball team, I 
was sent down to play with the sophomores on junior varsity. I had 
been playing since age four, and for someone who had spent so much 
time and effort on the sport, getting cut was humiliating, I vividly 
remember the day it happened. I sat in my car and cried as I flipped 
through the radio, desperately searching for a song that would make 
me feel better. 

After a year of self-doubt, I managed to make the varsity team as a 
senior, but I rarely made it on the field. In total, I played eleven 
innings of high school varsity baseball, barely more than a single game. 

Despite my lackluster high school career, I still believed I could 
become a great player. And I knew that if things were going to 
improve, I was the one responsible for making it happen. The turning 
point came two years after my injury, when I began college at Denison 
University. It was a new beginning, and it was the place where I would 
discover the surprising power of small habits for the first time. 


HOW I LEARNED ABOUT HABITS 

Attending Denison was one of the best decisions of my life, I earned a 
spot on the baseball team and, although I was at the bottom of the 
roster as a freshman, I was thrilled. Despite the chaos of my high 
school years, I had managed to become a college athlete. 

I wasn’t going to be starting on the baseball team anytime soon, so I 
focused on getting my life in order. While my peers stayed up late and 



played video games, I built good sleep habits and went to bed early 
each night. In the messy world of a college dorm, I made a point to 
keep my room neat and tidy. These improvements were minor, but 
they gave me a sense of control over my life. I started to feel confident 
again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the classroom as I 
improved my study habits and managed to earn straight A’s during my 
first year, 

A habit is a routine or behavior that is performed regularly—and, in 
many cases, automatically. As each semester passed, I accumulated 
small but consistent habits that ultimately led to results that were 
unimaginable to me when I started. For example, for the first time in 
my life, I made it a habit to lift weights multiple times per week, and in 
the years that followed, my six-foot-four-inch frame bulked up from a 
featherweight 170 to a lean 200 pounds. 

When my sophomore season arrived, I earned a starting role on the 
pitching staff. By my junior year, I was voted team captain and at the 
end of the season, I was selected for the all-conference team. But it was 
not until my senior season that my sleep habits, study habits, and 
strength-training habits really began to pay off. 

Six years after I had been hit in the face with a baseball bat, flown to 
the hospital, and placed into a coma, I was selected as the top male 
athlete at Denison University and named to the ESPN Academic All- 
America Team—an honor given to just thirty-three players across the 
country. By the time I graduated, I was listed in the school record 
books in eight different categories. That same year, I was awarded the 
university’s highest academic honor, the President’s Medal, 

I hope you’ll forgive me if this sounds boastful. To be honest, there 
was nothing legendary or historic about my athletic career. I never 
ended up playing professionally. However, looking back on those 
years, I believe I accomplished something just as rare: I fulfilled my 
potential. And I believe the concepts in this book can help you fulfill 
your potential as well. 

We all face challenges in life. This injury was one of mine, and the 
experience taught me a critical lesson: changes that seem small and 
unimportant at first will compound into remarkable results if you’re 
willing to stick with them for years. We all deal with setbacks but in the 
long run, the quality of our lives often depends on the quality of our 



habits. With the same habits, you’ll end up with the same results. But 
with better habits, anything is possible. 

Maybe there are people who can achieve incredible success 
overnight. I don’t know any of them, and I’m certainly not one of them. 
There wasn’t one defining moment on my journey from medically 
induced coma to Academic All-American; there were many. It was a 
gradual evolution, a long series of small wins and tiny breakthroughs. 
The only way I made progress—the only choice I had—was to start 
small. And I employed this same strategy a few years later when I 
started my own business and began working on this book. 


HOW AND WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK 

In November 2012 ,1 began publishing articles atjamesclear.com. For 
years, I had been keeping notes about my personal experiments with 
habits and I was finally ready to share some of them publicly. I began 
by publishing a new article every Monday and Thursday. Within a few 
months, this simple writing habit led to my first one thousand email 
subscribers, and by the end of 2013 that number had grown to more 
than thirty thousand people. 

In 2014, my email list expanded to over one hundred thousand 
subscribers, which made it one of the fastest-growing newsletters on 
the internet. I had felt like an impostor when I began writing two years 
earlier, but now I was becoming known as an expert on habits—a new 
label that excited me but also felt uncomfortable. I had never 
considered myself a master of the topic, but rather someone who was 
experimenting alongside my readers. 

In 2015 ,1 reached two hundred thousand email subscribers and 
signed a book deal with Penguin Random House to begin writing the 
book you are reading now. As my audience grew, so did my business 
opportunities. I was increasingly asked to speak at top companies 
about the science of habit formation, behavior change, and continuous 
improvement. I found myself delivering keynote speeches at 
conferences in the United States and Europe. 

In 2016, my articles began to appear regularly in major publications 
like Time, Entrepreneur, and Forbes. Incredibly, my writing was read 
by over eight million people that year. Coaches in the NFL, NBA, and 
MLB began reading my work and sharing it with their teams. 



At the start of 2017 ,1 launched the Habits Academy, which became 
the premier training platform for organizations and individuals 
interested in building better habits in life and work.* Fortune 500 
companies and growing start-ups began to enroll their leaders and 
train their staff. In total, over ten thousand leaders, managers, 
coaches, and teachers have graduated from the Habits Academy, and 
my work with them has taught me an incredible amount about what it 
takes to make habits work in the real world. 

As I put the finishing touches on this book in 2018, jamesclear.com 
is receiving millions of visitors per month and nearly five hundred 
thousand people subscribe to my weekly email newsletter—a number 
that is so far beyond my expectations when I began that I’m not even 
sure what to think of it. 


HOW THIS BOOK WILL BENEFIT YOU 

The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant has said, “To write a 
great book, you must first become the book.” I originally learned about 
the ideas mentioned here because I had to live them. I had to rely on 
small habits to rebound from my injury, to get stronger in the gym, to 
perform at a high level on the field, to become a writer, to build a 
successful business, and simply to develop into a responsible adult. 
Small habits helped me fulfill my potential, and since you picked up 
this book. I’m guessing you’d like to fulfill yours as well. 

In the pages that follow, I will share a step-by-step plan for building 
better habits—not for days or weeks, but for a lifetime. While science 
supports everything I’ve written, this book is not an academic research 
paper; it’s an operating manual. You’ll find wisdom and practical 
advice front and center as I explain the science of how to create and 
change your habits in a way that is easy to understand and apply. 

The fields I draw on—biology, neuroscience, philosophy, 
psychology, and more—have been around for many years. What I offer 
you is a synthesis of the best ideas smart people figured out a long time 
ago as well as the most compelling discoveries scientists have made 
recently. My contribution, I hope, is to find the ideas that matter most 
and connect them in a way that is highly actionable. Anything wise in 
these pages you should credit to the many experts who preceded me. 
Anything foolish, assume it is my error. 


The backbone of this book is my four-step model of habits—cue, 
craving, response, and reward—and the four laws of behavior change 
that evolve out of these steps. Readers with a psychology background 
may recognize some of these terms from operant conditioning, which 
was first proposed as “stimulus, response, reward” by B, F. Skinner in 
the 1930s and has been popularized more recently as “cue, routine, 
reward” in The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg, 

Behavioral scientists like Skinner realized that if you offered the 
right reward or punishment, you could get people to act in a certain 
way. But while Skinner’s model did an excellent job of explaining how 
external stimuli influenced our habits, it lacked a good explanation for 
how our thoughts, feelings, and beliefs impact our behavior. Internal 
states—our moods and emotions—matter, too. In recent decades, 
scientists have begun to determine the connection between our 
thoughts, feelings, and behavior. This research will also be covered in 
these pages. 

In total, the framework I offer is an integrated model of the 
cognitive and behavioral sciences. I believe it is one of the first models 
of human behavior to accurately account for both the influence of 
external stimuli and internal emotions on our habits. While some of 
the language may be familiar, I am confident that the details—and the 
applications of the Four Laws of Behavior Change—will offer a new 
way to think about your habits. 

Human behavior is always changing: situation to situation, moment 
to moment, second to second. But this book is about what doesn’t 
change. It’s about the fundamentals of human behavior. The lasting 
principles you can rely on year after year. The ideas you can build a 
business around, build a family around, build a life around. 

There is no one right way to create better habits, but this book 
describes the best way I know—an approach that will be effective 
regardless of where you start or what you’re trying to change. The 
strategies I cover will be relevant to anyone looking for a step-by-step 
system for improvement, whether your goals center on health, money, 
productivity, relationships, or all of the above. As long as human 
behavior is involved, this book will be your guide. 



THE 

FUNDAMENTALS 

Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference 


1 


The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits 

T he fate of British Cycling changed one day in 2003, The 
organization, which was the governing body for professional 
cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired Dave Brailsford as its new 
performance director. At the time, professional cyclists in Great Britain 
had endured nearly one hundred years of mediocrity. Since 1908, 
British riders had won just a single gold medal at the Olympic Games, 
and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest race, the Tour de 
France. In no years, no British cyclist had ever won the event. 

In fact, the performance of British riders had been so 
underwhelming that one of the top bike manufacturers in Europe 
refused to sell bikes to the team because they were afraid that it would 
hurt sales if other professionals saw the Brits using their gear. 

Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new trajectory. 
What made him different from previous coaches was his relentless 
commitment to a strategy that he referred to as “the aggregation of 
marginal gains,” which was the philosophy of searching for a tiny 
margin of improvement in everything you do. Brailsford said, “The 
whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down everything 
you could think of that goes into riding a bike, and then improve it by 1 
percent, you will get a significant increase when you put them all 
together.” 

Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments you 
might expect from a professional cycling team. They redesigned the 
bike seats to make them more comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the 
tires for a better grip. They asked riders to wear electrically heated 
overshorts to maintain ideal muscle temperature while riding and used 


biofeedback sensors to monitor how each athlete responded to a 
particular workout. The team tested various fabrics in a wind tunnel 
and had their outdoor riders switch to indoor racing suits, which 
proved to be lighter and more aerodynamic. 

But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team continued to find 
1 percent improvements in overlooked and unexpected areas. They 
tested different types of massage gels to see which one led to the fastest 
muscle recovery. They hired a surgeon to teach each rider the best way 
to wash their hands to reduce the chances of catching a cold. They 
determined the type of pillow and mattress that led to the best night’s 
sleep for each rider. They even painted the inside of the team truck 
white, which helped them spot little bits of dust that would normally 
slip by unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the finely 
tuned bikes. 

As these and hundreds of other small improvements accumulated, 
the results came faster than anyone could have imagined. 

Just five years after Brailsford took over, the British Cycling team 
dominated the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic 
Games in Beijing, where they won an astounding 60 percent of the 
gold medals available. Four years later, when the Olympic Games came 
to London, the Brits raised the bar as they set nine Olympic records 
and seven world records. 

That same year, Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist to 
win the Tour de France. The next year, his teammate Chris Froome 
won the race, and he would go on to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, 
giving the British team five Tour de France victories in six years. 

During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British cyclists won 
178 world championships and sixty-six Olympic or Paralympic gold 
medals and captured five Tour de France victories in what is widely 
regarded as the most successful run in cycling history.* 

How does this happen? How does a team of previously ordinary 
athletes transform into world champions with tiny changes that, at 
first glance, would seem to make a modest difference at best? Why do 
small improvements accumulate into such remarkable results, and 
how can you replicate this approach in your own life? 


WHY SMALL HABITS MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE 


It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one defining moment 
and underestimate the value of making small improvements on a daily 
basis. Too often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires 
massive action. Whether it is losing weight, building a business, 
writing a book, winning a championship, or achieving any other goal, 
we put pressure on ourselves to make some earth-shattering 
improvement that everyone will talk about. 

Meanwhile, improving by i percent isn’t particularly notable— 
sometimes it isn’t even noticeable—hut it can be far more meaningful, 
especially in the long run. The difference a tiny improvement can make 
over time is astounding, Here’s how the math works out: if you can get 
1 percent better each day for one year, you’ll end up thirty-seven times 
better by the time you’re done. Conversely, if you get i percent worse 
each day for one year, you’ll decline nearly down to zero. What starts 
as a small win or a minor setback accumulates into something much 
more. 


1% BETTER EVERY DAY 

1 % worse every day for one year. 0.99^®^ = 00.03 
1 % better every day for one year. 1.01 = 37.78 



1% IMPROVEMENT 



TIME 

FIGURE 1: The effects of small habits compound over time. For example, if 
you can get just 1 percent better each day, you’ll end up with results that are 
nearly 37 times better after one year. 


Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. The same 
way that money multiplies through compound interest, the effects of 
your habits multiply as you repeat them. They seem to make little 
difference on any given day and yet the impact they deliver over the 
months and years can be enormous. It is only when looking back two, 
five, or perhaps ten years later that the value of good habits and the 
cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent. 

This can be a difficult concept to appreciate in daily life. We often 
dismiss small changes because they don’t seem to matter very much in 
the moment. If you save a little money now, you’re still not a 
millionaire. If you go to the gym three days in a row, you’re still out of 
shape. If you study Mandarin for an hour tonight, you still haven’t 
learned the language. We make a few changes, but the results never 
seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our previous routines. 

Unfortunately, the slow pace of transformation also makes it easy to 
let a bad habit slide. If you eat an unhealthy meal today, the scale 
doesn’t move much. If you work late tonight and ignore your family. 








they will forgive you. If you procrastinate and put your project off until 
tomorrow, there will usually be time to finish it later, A single decision 
is easy to dismiss. 

But when we repeat i percent errors, day after day, by replicating 
poor decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and rationalizing little 
excuses, our small choices compound into toxic results. It’s the 
accumulation of many missteps—a i percent decline here and there— 
that eventually leads to a problem. 

The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect 
of shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you 
are flying from Los Angeles to New York City, If a pilot leaving from 
LAX adjusts the heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in 
Washington, D.C., instead of New York. Such a small change is barely 
noticeable at takeoff—the nose of the airplane moves just a few feet— 
but when magnified across the entire United States, you end up 
hundreds of miles apart.* 

Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a 
very different destination. Making a choice that is 1 percent better or 1 
percent worse seems insignificant in the moment, but over the span of 
moments that make up a lifetime these choices determine the 
difference between who you are and who you could be. Success is the 
product of daily habits—not once-in-a-lifetime transformations. 

That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or unsuccessful you are 
right now. What matters is whether your habits are putting you on the 
path toward success. You should be far more concerned with your 
current trajectory than with your current results. If you’re a millionaire 
but you spend more than you earn each month, then you’re on a bad 
trajectory. If your spending habits don’t change, it’s not going to end 
well. Conversely, if you’re broke, but you save a little bit every month, 
then you’re on the path toward financial freedom—even if you’re 
moving slower than you’d like. 

Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits. Your net worth 
is a lagging measure of your financial habits. Your weight is a lagging 
measure of your eating habits. Your knowledge is a lagging measure of 
your learning habits. Your clutter is a lagging measure of your cleaning 
habits. You get what you repeat. 


If you want to predict where you’ll end up in life, all you have to do 
is follow the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses, and see how your daily 
choices will compound ten or twenty years down the line. Are you 
spending less than you earn each month? Are you making it into the 
gym each week? Are you reading books and learning something new 
each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones that will define your 
future self. 

Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will 
multiply whatever you feed it. Good habits make time your ally. Bad 
habits make time your enemy. 

Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you down just 
as easily as good habits can build you up, which is why understanding 
the details is crucial. You need to know how habits work and how to 
design them to your liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the 
blade. 


YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR YOU OR AGAINST YOU 


Positive Compounding 


Productivity compounds. Accomplishing one extra task is a small feat on any given day, 
but it counts for a lot over an entire career. The effect of automating an old task or mastering 
a new skill can be even greater. The more tasks you can handle without thinking, the more 
your brain is free to focus on other areas. 

Knowledge compounds. Learning one new idea won’t make you a genius, but a 
commitment to lifelong learning can be transformative. Furthermore, each book you read not 
only teaches you something new but also opens up different ways of thinking about old 
ideas. As Warren Buffett says, “That’s how knowledge works. It builds up, like compound 
interest.” 

Relationships compound. People reflect your behavior back to you. The more you help 
others, the more others want to help you. Being a little bit nicer in each interaction can result 
in a network of broad and strong connections over time. 


Negative Compounding 


Stress compounds. The frustration of a traffic jam. The weight of parenting responsibilities. 
The worry of making ends meet. The strain of slightly high blood pressure. By themselves, 
these common causes of stress are manageable. But when they persist for years, little 
stresses compound into serious health issues. 

Negative thoughts compound. The more you think of yourself as worthless, stupid, or ugly, 
the more you condition yourself to interpret life that way. You get trapped in a thought loop. 
The same is true for how you think about others. Once you fall into the habit of seeing people 
as angry, unjust, or selfish, you see those kind of people everywhere. 

Outrage compounds. Riots, protests, and mass movements are rarely the result of a single 
event. Instead, a long series of microaggressions and daily aggravations slowly multiply until 
one event tips the scales and outrage spreads like wildfire. 










WHAT PROGRESS IS REALLY LIKE 


Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in front of you. 
The room is cold and you can see your breath. It is currently twenty- 
five degrees. Ever so slowly, the room begins to heat up. 

Twenty-six degrees. 

Twenty-seven, 

Twenty-eight. 

The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you. 

Twenty-nine degrees. 

Thirty, 

Thirty-one, 

Still, nothing has happened. 

Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-degree shift, 
seemingly no different from the temperature increases before it, has 
unlocked a huge change. 

Breakthrough moments are often the result of many previous 
actions, which build up the potential required to unleash a major 
change. This pattern shows up everywhere. Cancer spends 8o percent 
of its life undetectable, then takes over the body in months. Bamboo 
can barely be seen for the first five years as it builds extensive root 
systems underground before exploding ninety feet into the air within 
six weeks. 

Similarly, habits often appear to make no difference until you cross 
a critical threshold and unlock a new level of performance. In the early 
and middle stages of any quest, there is often a Valley of 
Disappointment. You expect to make progress in a linear fashion and 
it’s frustrating how ineffective changes can seem during the first days, 
weeks, and even months. It doesn’t feel like you are going anywhere. 
It’s a hallmark of any compounding process: the most powerful 
outcomes are delayed. 

This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build habits that 
last. People make a few small changes, fail to see a tangible result, and 
decide to stop. You think, “I’ve been running every day for a month, so 
why can’t I see any change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking 



takes over, it’s easy to let good habits fall by the wayside. But in order 
to make a meaningful difference, habits need to persist long enough to 
break through this plateau—what I call the Plateau of Latent Potential. 

If you find yourself struggling to build a good habit or break a bad 
one, it is not because you have lost your ability to improve. It is often 
because you have not yet crossed the Plateau of Latent Potential. 
Complaining about not achieving success despite working hard is like 
complaining about an ice cube not melting when you heated it from 
twenty-five to thirty-one degrees. Your work was not wasted; it is just 
being stored. All the action happens at thirty-two degrees. 

When you finally break through the Plateau of Latent Potential, 
people will call it an overnight success. The outside world only sees the 
most dramatic event rather than all that preceded it. But you know that 
it’s the work you did long ago—when it seemed that you weren’t 
making any progress—that makes the jump today possible. 

It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. Two tectonic 
plates can grind against one another for millions of years, the tension 
slowly building all the while. Then, one day, they rub each other once 
again, in the same fashion they have for ages, but this time the tension 
is too great. An earthquake erupts. Change can take years—before it 
happens all at once. 

Mastery requires patience. The San Antonio Spurs, one of the most 
successful teams in NBA history, have a quote from social reformer 
Jacob Riis hanging in their locker room: “When nothing seems to help, 
I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at his rock, perhaps a 
hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet at the 
hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I know it was not that 
last blow that did it—but all that had gone before.” 


THE PLATEAU OF LATENT POTENTIAL 




DISAPPOINTMENT 

FIGURE 2: We often expect progress to be linear. At the very least, we hope 
it will come quickly. In reality, the results of our efforts are often delayed. It is 
not until months or years later that we realize the true value of the previous 
work we have done. This can result in a “valley of disappointment” where 
people feel discouraged after putting in weeks or months of hard work 
without experiencing any results. However, this work was not wasted. It was 
simply being stored. It is not until much later that the full value of previous 
efforts is revealed. 


All big things come from small beginnings. The seed of every habit 
is a single, tiny decision. But as that decision is repeated, a habit 
sprouts and grows stronger. Roots entrench themselves and branches 
grow. The task of breaking a bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak 
within us. And the task of building a good habit is like cultivating a 
delicate flower one day at a time. 

But what determines whether we stick with a habit long enough to 
survive the Plateau of Latent Potential and break through to the other 
side? What is it that causes some people to slide into unwanted habits 
and enables others to enjoy the compounding effects of good ones? 


FORGET ABOUT GOALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD 

Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what we want in 
life—getting into better shape, building a successful business, relaxing 
more and worrying less, spending more time with friends and family— 
is to set specific, actionable goals. 




For many years, this was how I approached my habits, too. Each one 
was a goal to be reached. I set goals for the grades I wanted to get in 
school, for the weights I wanted to lift in the gym, for the profits I 
wanted to earn in business. I succeeded at a few, but I failed at a lot of 
them. Eventually, I began to realize that my results had very little to do 
with the goals I set and nearly everything to do with the systems I 
followed. 

What’s the difference between systems and goals? It’s a distinction I 
first learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind the Dilbert 
comic. Goals are about the results you want to achieve. Systems are 
about the processes that lead to those results. 

■ If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a championship. Your 
system is the way you recruit players, manage your assistant 
coaches, and conduct practice. 

■ If you’re an entrepreneur, your goal might be to build a million- 
dollar business. Your system is how you test product ideas, hire 
employees, and run marketing campaigns. 

■ If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new piece. Your 
system is how often you practice, how you break down and tackle 
difficult measures, and your method for receiving feedback from 
your instructor. 

Now for the interesting question: If you completely ignored your 
goals and focused only on your system, would you still succeed? Eor 
example, if you were a basketball coach and you ignored your goal to 
win a championship and focused only on what your team does at 
practice each day, would you still get results? 

I think you would. 

The goal in any sport is to finish with the best score, but it would be 
ridiculous to spend the whole game staring at the scoreboard. The only 
way to actually win is to get better each day. In the words of three-time 
Super Bowl winner Bill Walsh, “The score takes care of itself.” The 
same is true for other areas of life. If you want better results, then 
forget about setting goals. Focus on your system instead. 

What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless? Of course 
not. Goals are good for setting a direction, but systems are best for 



making progress. A handful of problems arise when you spend too 
much time thinking about your goals and not enough time designing 
your systems. 


Problem #1: Winners and losers have the same goals. 

Goal setting suffers from a serious case of survivorship bias. We 
concentrate on the people who end up winning—the survivors—and 
mistakenly assume that ambitious goals led to their success while 
overlooking all of the people who had the same objective but didn’t 
succeed. 

Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every candidate wants 
to get the job. And if successful and unsuccessful people share the 
same goals, then the goal cannot be what differentiates the winners 
from the losers. It wasn’t the goal of winning the Tour de France that 
propelled the British cyclists to the top of the sport. Presumably, they 
had wanted to win the race every year before—just like every other 
professional team. The goal had always been there. It was only when 
they implemented a system of continuous small improvements that 
they achieved a different outcome. 


Problem #2: Achieving a goal is only a momentary change. 

Imagine you have a messy room and you set a goal to clean it. If you 
summon the energy to tidy up, then you will have a clean room—for 
now. But if you maintain the same sloppy, pack-rat habits that led to a 
messy room in the first place, soon you’ll be looking at a new pile of 
clutter and hoping for another burst of motivation. You’re left chasing 
the same outcome because you never changed the system behind it. 
You treated a symptom without addressing the cause. 

Achieving a goal only changes your life/or the moment. That’s the 
counterintuitive thing about improvement. We think we need to 
change our results, but the results are not the problem. What we really 
need to change are the systems that cause those results. When you 
solve problems at the results level, you only solve them temporarily. In 
order to improve for good, you need to solve problems at the systems 
level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will fix themselves. 



Problem #3: Goals restrict your happiness. 


The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I reach my goal, 
then I’ll be happy.” The problem with a goals-first mentality is that 
you’re continually putting happiness off until the next milestone. I’ve 
slipped into this trap so many times I’ve lost count. For years, 
happiness was always something for my future self to enjoy. I 
promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of muscle or after 
my business was featured in the New York Times, then I could finally 
relax. 

Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conflict: either you achieve 
your goal and are successful or you fail and you are a disappointment. 
You mentally box yourself into a narrow version of happiness. This is 
misguided. It is unlikely that your actual path through life will match 
the exact journey you had in mind when you set out. It makes no sense 
to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when there are many paths 
to success. 

A systems-first mentality provides the antidote. When you fall in 
love with the process rather than the product, you don’t have to wait to 
give yourself permission to be happy. You can be satisfied anytime 
your system is running. And a system can be successful in many 
different forms, not just the one you first envision. 


Problem #4: Goals are at odds with long-term progress. 

Finally, a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” effect. Many 
runners work hard for months, but as soon as they cross the finish line, 
they stop training. The race is no longer there to motivate them. When 
all of your hard work is focused on a particular goal, what is left to 
push you forward after you achieve it? This is why many people find 
themselves reverting to their old habits after accomplishing a goal. 

The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of 
building systems is to continue playing the game. True long-term 
thinking is goal-less thinking. It’s not about any single 
accomplishment. It is about the cycle of endless refinement and 
continuous improvement. Ultimately, it is your commitment to the 
proeess that will determine your propress. 



A SYSTEM OF ATOMIC HABITS 


If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. 
The problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and 
again not because you don’t want to change, but because you have the 
wrong system for change. 

You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your 
systems. 

Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal, is one of 
the core themes of this book. It is also one of the deeper meanings 
behind the word atomic. By now, you’ve probably realized that an 
atomic habit refers to a tiny change, a marginal gain, a i percent 
improvement. But atomic habits are not just any old habits, however 
small. They are little habits that are part of a larger system. Just as 
atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the 
building blocks of remarkable results. 

Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a fundamental 
unit that contributes to your overall improvement. At first, these tiny 
routines seem insignificant, but soon they build on each other and fuel 
bigger wins that multiply to a degree that far outweighs the cost of 
their initial investment. They are both small and mighty. This is the 
meaning of the phrase atomic habits—a regular practice or routine 
that is not only small and easy to do, but also the source of incredible 
power; a component of the system of compound growth. 

Chapter Summary 

■ Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. Getting i 
percent better every day counts for a lot in the long-run, 

■ Habits are a double-edged sword. They can work for you or 
against you, which is why understanding the details is essential. 

■ Small changes often appear to make no difference until you cross 
a critical threshold. The most powerful outcomes of any 
compounding process are delayed. You need to be patient. 

■ An atomic habit is a little habit that is part of a larger system. Just 
as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are 
the building blocks of remarkable results. 



If you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus 
on your system instead. 

You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of 
your systems. 



2 


How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and 

Vice Versa) 

W HY IS IT SO easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to form good 
ones? Few things can have a more powerful impact on your life 
than improving your daily habits. And yet it is likely that this time next 
year you’ll be doing the same thing rather than something better. 

It often feels difficult to keep good habits going for more than a few 
days, even with sincere effort and the occasional burst of motivation. 
Habits like exercise, meditation, journaling, and cooking are 
reasonable for a day or two and then become a hassle. 

However, once your habits are established, they seem to stick 
around forever—especially the unwanted ones. Despite our best 
intentions, unhealthy habits like eating junk food, watching too much 
television, procrastinating, and smoking can feel impossible to break. 

Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (i) we try to 
change the wrong thing and (2) we try to change our habits in the 
wrong way. In this chapter. I’ll address the first point. In the chapters 
that follow. I’ll answer the second. 

Our first mistake is that we try to change the wrong thing. To 
understand what I mean, consider that there are three levels at which 
change can occur. You can imagine them like the layers of an onion. 


THREE LAYERS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE 


OUTCOMES 



PROCESSES 


IDENTITY 


FIGURE 3: There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your 
outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity. 


The first layer is changing your outcomes. This level is 
concerned with changing your results: losing weight, publishing a 
book, winning a championship. Most of the goals you set are 
associated with this level of change. 

The second layer is changing your process. This level is 
concerned with changing your habits and systems: implementing a 
new routine at the gym, decluttering your desk for better workflow, 
developing a meditation practice. Most of the habits you build are 
associated with this level. 

The third and deepest layer is changing your identity. This 
level is concerned with changing your beliefs: your worldview, your 
self-image, your judgments about yourself and others. Most of the 
beliefs, assumptions, and biases you hold are associated with this level. 

Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about what you do. 
Identity is about what you believe. When it comes to building habits 
that last—when it comes to building a system of i percent 
improvements—the problem is not that one level is “better” or “worse” 
than another. All levels of change are useful in their own way. The 
problem is the direction of change. 

Many people begin the process of changing their habits by focusing 
on what they want to achieve. This leads us to outcome-based habits. 
The alternative is to build identity-based habits. With this approach, 
we start by focusing on who we wish to become. 


OUTCOME-BASED HABITS 




FIGURE 4: With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you want to 
achieve. With identity-based habits, the focus is on who you wish to 
become. 

Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When offered a smoke, the 
first person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to quit.” It sounds like a 
reasonable response, but this person still believes they are a smoker 
who is trying to be something else. They are hoping their behavior will 
change while carrying around the same beliefs. 

The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m not a 
smoker.” It’s a small difference, but this statement signals a shift in 
identity. Smoking was part of their former life, not their current one. 
They no longer identify as someone who smokes. 

Most people don’t even consider identity change when they set out 
to improve. They just think, “I want to be skinny (outcome) and if I 
stick to this diet, then I’ll be skinny (process).” They set goals and 
determine the actions they should take to achieve those goals without 
considering the beliefs that drive their actions. They never shift the 




way they look at themselves, and they don’t realize that their old 
identity can sabotage their new plans for change. 

Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. The system of 
a democracy is founded on beliefs like freedom, majority rule, and 
social equality. The system of a dictatorship has a very different set of 
beliefs like absolute authority and strict obedience. You can imagine 
many ways to try to get more people to vote in a democracy, but such 
behavior change would never get off the ground in a dictatorship. 

That’s not the identity of the system. Voting is a behavior that is 
impossible under a certain set of beliefs. 

A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing individuals, 
organizations, or societies. There are a set of beliefs and assumptions 
that shape the system, an identity behind the habits. 

Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last. You may 
want more money, but if your identity is someone who consumes 
rather than creates, then you’ll continue to be pulled toward spending 
rather than earning. You may want better health, but if you continue to 
prioritize comfort over accomplishment, you’ll be drawn to relaxing 
rather than training. It’s hard to change your habits if you never 
change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have 
a new goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who you are. 

The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder, Colorado, 
provides a good example. “For as long as I can remember. I’ve chewed 
my fingernails,” Clark told me. “It started as a nervous habit when I 
was young, and then morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual. 

One day, I resolved to stop chewing my nails until they grew out a bit. 
Through mindful willpower alone, I managed to do it.” 

Then, Clark did something surprising. 

“I asked my wife to schedule my first-ever manicure,” he said. “My 
thought was that if I started paying to maintain my nails, I wouldn’t 
chew them. And it worked, but not for the monetary reason. What 
happened was the manicure made my fingers look really nice for the 
first time. The manicurist even said that—other than the chewing—I 
had really healthy, attractive nails. Suddenly, I was proud of my 
fingernails. And even though that’s something I had never aspired to, it 
made all the difference. I’ve never chewed my nails since; not even a 



single close call. And it’s because I now take pride in properly caring 
for them.” 

The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes 
part of your identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who 
wants this. It’s something very different to say I’m the type of person 
who is this. 

The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the 
more motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it. If 
you’re proud of how your hair looks, you’ll develop all sorts of habits to 
care for and maintain it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, 
you’ll make sure you never skip an upper-body workout. If you’re 
proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more likely to spend hours 
knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved, you’ll fight tooth 
and nail to maintain your habits. 

True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit 
because of motivation, but the only reason you’ll stick with one is that 
it becomes part of your identity. Anyone can convince themselves to 
visit the gym or eat healthy once or twice, but if you don’t shift the 
belief behind the behavior, then it is hard to stick with long-term 
changes. Improvements are only temporary until they become part of 
who you are. 

■ The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become a reader. 

■ The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to become a runner. 

■ The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become a 
musician. 

Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do 
is an indication of the type of person you believe that you are—either 
consciously or nonconsciously.* Research has shown that once a 
person believes in a particular aspect of their identity, they are more 
likely to act in alignment with that belief. For example, people who 
identified as “being a voter” were more likely to vote than those who 
simply claimed “voting” was an action they wanted to perform. 
Similarly, the person who incorporates exercise into their identity 
doesn’t have to convince themselves to train. Doing the right thing is 
easy. After all, when your behavior and your identity are fully aligned. 


you are no longer pursuing behavior change. You are simply acting like 
the type of person you already believe yourself to be. 

Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-edged 
sword. When working for you, identity change can be a powerful force 
for self-improvement. When working against you, though, identity 
change can be a curse. Once you have adopted an identity, it can be 
easy to let your allegiance to it impact your ability to change. Many 
people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly following the 
norms attached to their identity. 

■ “I’m terrible with directions.” 

■ “I’m not a morning person.” 

■ “I’m bad at remembering people’s names.” 

■ “I’m always late.” 

■ “I’m not good with technology.” 

■ “I’m horrible at math.” 

... and a thousand other variations. 

When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to 
slide into these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you 
begin to resist certain actions because “that’s not who I am.” There is 
internal pressure to maintain your self-image and behave in a way that 
is consistent with your beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid 
contradicting yourself. 

The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the 
more difficult it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what 
your culture believes (group identity) or to do what upholds your self- 
image (personal identity), even if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to 
positive change at any level—individual, team, society—is identity 
conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if they conflict with 
your identity, you will fail to put them into action. 

On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re 
too busy or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. 
Over the long run, however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits 
is that your self-image gets in the way. This is why you can’t get too 
attached to one version of your identity. Progress requires unlearning. 



Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit 
your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity. 

This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs and 
worldview play such an important role in your behavior, where do they 
come from in the first place? How, exactly, is your identity formed? 
And how can you emphasize new aspects of your identity that serve 
you and gradually erase the pieces that hinder you? 


THE TWO-STEP PROCESS TO CHANGING YOUR IDENTITY 

Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset 
beliefs. Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and 
conditioned through experience.* 

More precisely, your habits are how you embody your identity. 
When you make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an 
organized person. When you write each day, you embody the identity 
of a creative person. When you train each day, you embody the identity 
of an athletic person. 

The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity 
associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity was originally 
derived from the Latin words essentitas, which means being, and 
identidem, which means repeatedly. Your identity is literally your 
“repeated beingness.” 

Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you 
have proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you 
have evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour 
every night, you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the 
gym even when it’s snowing, you have evidence that you are committed 
to fitness. The more evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly 
you will believe it. 

For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you 
were to ask any of my high school teachers or college professors, they 
would tell you I was an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. 
When I began my writing career, I published a new article every 
Monday and Thursday for the first few years. As the evidence grew, so 
did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a writer. I became one 
through my habits. 


Of course, your habits are not the only actions that influence your 
identity, but by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most 
important ones. Each experience in life modifies your self-image, but 
it’s unlikely you would consider yourself a soccer player because you 
kicked a ball once or an artist because you scribbled a picture. As you 
repeat these actions, however, the evidence accumulates and your self- 
image begins to change. The effect of one-off experiences tends to fade 
away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with time, which means 
your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your identity. 
In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of 
becoming yourself. 

This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our 
fingers and deciding to be someone entirely new. We change bit by bit, 
day by day, habit by habit. We are continually undergoing 
microevolutions of the self. 

Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey, maybe this is who I am.” If you 
finish a book, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes 
reading. If you go to the gym, then perhaps you are the type of person 
who likes exercise. If you practice playing the guitar, perhaps you are 
the type of person who likes music. 

Every action you take is a vote for the type of person you wish to 
become. No single instance will transform your beliefs, but as the votes 
build up, so does the evidence of your new identity. This is one reason 
why meaningful change does not require radical change. Small habits 
can make a meaningful difference by providing evidence of a new 
identity. And if a change is meaningful, it actually is big. That’s the 
paradox of making small improvements. 

Putting this all together, you can see that habits are the path to 
changing your identity. The most practical way to change who you are 
is to change what you do. 

■ Each time you write a page, you are a writer. 

■ Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician. 

■ Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete. 

■ Each time you encourage your employees, you are a leader. 



Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far 
more important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually 
accomplish these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence 
begins to change, the story you tell yourself begins to change as well. 

Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to 
perform a bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that 
you don’t need to be perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes 
for both sides. You don’t need a unanimous vote to win an election; 
you just need a majority. It doesn’t matter if you cast a few votes for a 
bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your goal is simply to win the 
majority of the time. 

New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same 
votes you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve 
always had. If nothing changes, nothing is going to change. 

It is a simple two-step process: 

1. Decide the type of person you want to be. 

2. Prove it to yourself with small wins. 

First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level—as an 
individual, as a team, as a community, as a nation. What do you want 
to stand for? What are your principles and values? Who do you wish to 
become? 

These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure where to begin 
—but they do know what kind of results they want: to get six-pack abs 
or to feel less anxious or to double their salary. That’s fine. Start there 
and work backward from the results you want to the type of person 
who could get those results. Ask yourself, “Who is the type of person 
that could get the outcome I want?” Who is the type of person that 
could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of person that could learn a 
new language? Who is the type of person that could run a successful 
start-up? 

For example, “Who is the type of person who could write a book?” 
It’s probably someone who is consistent and reliable. Now your focus 
shifts from writing a book (outcome-based) to being the type of person 
who is consistent and reliable (identity-based). 

This process can lead to beliefs like: 



“I’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her students,” 


■ “I’m the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time and 
empathy they need.” 

■ “I’m the kind of manager who advocates for her employees,” 

Once you have a handle on the type of person you want to be, you 
can begin taking small steps to reinforce your desired identity. I have a 
friend who lost over loo pounds by asking herself, “What would a 
healthy person do?” All day long, she would use this question as a 
guide. Would a healthy person walk or take a cab? Would a healthy 
person order a burrito or a salad? She figured if she acted like a healthy 
person long enough, eventually she would become that person. She 
was right. 

The concept of identity-based habits is our first introduction to 
another key theme in this book: feedback loops. Your habits shape 
your identity, and your identity shapes your habits. It’s a two-way 
street. The formation of all habits is a feedback loop (a concept we will 
explore in depth in the next chapter), but it’s important to let your 
values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than your results. 
The focus should always be on becoming that type of person, not 
getting a particular outcome. 


THE REAL REASON HABITS MATTER 

Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The remainder of 
this book will provide you with step-by-step instructions on how to 
build better habits in yourself, your family, your team, your company, 
and anywhere else you wish. But the true question is: “Are you 
becoming the type of person you want to become?” The first step is not 
what or how, but who. You need to know who you want to be. 
Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a rudder. And 
that’s why we are starting here. 

You have the power to change your beliefs about yourself. Your 
identity is not set in stone. You have a choice in every moment. You 
can choose the identity you want to reinforce today with the habits you 
choose today. And this brings us to the deeper purpose of this book 
and the real reason habits matter. 



Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with life hacks. 
It’s not about flossing one tooth each night or taking a cold shower 
each morning or wearing the same outfit each day. It’s not about 
achieving external measures of success like earning more money, 
losing weight, or reducing stress. Habits can help you achieve all of 
these things, but fundamentally they are not about having something. 
They are about becoming someone. 

Ultimately, your habits matter because they help you become the 
type of person you wish to be. They are the channel through which you 
develop your deepest beliefs about yourself. Quite literally, you become 
your habits. 

Chapter Summary 

■ There are three levels of change: outcome change, process change, 
and identity change. 

■ The most effective way to change your habits is to focus not on 
what you want to achieve, but on who you wish to become. 

■ Your identity emerges out of your habits. Every action is a vote for 
the type of person you wish to become. 

■ Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to 
continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your 
identity. 

■ The real reason habits matter is not because they can get you 
better results (although they can do that), but because they can 
change your beliefs about yourself. 



3 


How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple 

Steps 

I N 1898, A psychologist named Edward Thorndike conducted an 
experiment that would lay the foundation for our understanding of 
how habits form and the rules that guide our behavior, Thorndike was 
interested in studying the behavior of animals, and he started by 
working with cats. 

He would place each cat inside a device known as a puzzle box. The 
box was designed so that the cat could escape through a door “by some 
simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever, or 
stepping on a platform,” For example, one box contained a lever that, 
when pressed, would open a door on the side of the box. Once the door 
had been opened, the cat could dart out and run over to a bowl of food. 

Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed inside the 
box. They would poke their nose into the corners, stick their paws 
through openings, and claw at loose objects. After a few minutes of 
exploration, the cats would happen to press the magical lever, the door 
would open, and they would escape, 

Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many trials. In 
the beginning, the animals moved around the box at random. But as 
soon as the lever had been pressed and the door opened, the process of 
learning began. Gradually, each cat learned to associate the action of 
pressing the lever with the reward of escaping the box and getting to 
the food. 

After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so automatic and 
habitual that the cat could escape within a few seconds. For example. 


Thorndike noted, “Cat 12 took the following times to perform the act, 
160 seconds, 30 seconds, 90 seconds, 60,15, 28, 20, 30, 22,11,15, 20, 
12,10,14,10, 8, 8, 5,10, 8, 6, 6, 7.” 

During the first three trials, the cat escaped in an average of 1.5 
minutes. During the last three trials, it escaped in an average of 6.3 
seconds. With practice, each cat made fewer errors and their actions 
became quicker and more automatic. Rather than repeat the same 
mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to the solution. 

From his studies, Thorndike described the learning process by 
stating, “behaviors followed by satisfying consequences tend to be 
repeated and those that produce unpleasant consequences are less 
likely to be repeated.” His work provides the perfect starting point for 
discussing how habits form in our own lives. It also provides answers 
to some fundamental questions like: What are habits? And why does 
the brain bother building them at all? 


WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS 

A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become 
automatic. The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. 
Whenever you encounter a new situation in life, your brain has to 
make a decision. How do I respond to this? The first time you come 
across a problem, you’re not sure how to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, 
you’re just trying things out to see what works. 

Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are 
carefully analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about 
how to act. You’re taking in tons of new information and trying to 
make sense of it all. The brain is busy learning the most effective 
course of action. 

Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a 
solution. You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run 
calms you down. You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, 
and you learn that playing video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, 
exploring, exploring, and then—BAM—a reward. 

After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your 
strategy for next time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the 



events that preceded the reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What 
did I do right before that? 

This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, 
try differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and 
the useful actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming. 

Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to 
automate the process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of 
automatic solutions that solve the problems and stresses you face 
regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason Hreha writes, “Habits are, 
simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our environment.” 

As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain deereases. 

You learn to lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out 
everything else. When a similar situation arises in the future, you know 
exactly what to look for. There is no longer a need to analyze every 
angle of a situation. Your brain skips the process of trial and error and 
creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These cognitive scripts can be 
followed automatically whenever the situation is appropriate. Now, 
whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as you walk 
in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A choice 
that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created. 

Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a 
habit is just a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a 
problem in the past. Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw 
on this memory and automatically apply the same solution. The 
primary reason the brain remembers the past is to better predict what 
will work in the future. 

Habit formation is incredibly useful because the conscious mind is 
the bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at 
a time. As a result, your brain is always working to preserve your 
conscious attention for whatever task is most essential. Whenever 
possible, the conscious mind likes to pawn off tasks to the 
nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely what happens 
when a habit is formed. Habits reduce cognitive load and free up 
mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks. 

Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits 
of habits. The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I 
don’t want to pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t 



so much routine take away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” 
Hardly. Such questions set up a false dichotomy. They make you think 
that you have to choose between building habits and attaining 
freedom. In reality, the two complement each other. 

Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people 
who don’t have their habits handled are often the ones with the least 
amount of freedom. Without good financial habits, you will always be 
struggling for the next dollar. Without good health habits, you will 
always seem to be short on energy. Without good learning habits, you 
will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re always being 
forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work out, 
where do I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time 
for freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that 
you can create the mental space needed for free thinking and 
creativity. 

Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of 
life are handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges 
and master the next set of problems. Building habits in the present 
allows you to do more of what you want in the future. 


THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK 

The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps: 
cue, craving, response, and reward.* Breaking it down into these 
fundamental parts can help us understand what a habit is, how it 
works, and how to improve it. 


1 CUE 

1 CRAVING 

1 RESPONSE I 

REWARD 1 

1 1 

1 2 

1 3 1 

4 1 


TIME- > 

FIGURE 5: All habits proceed through four stages in the same order: cue, 
craving, response, and reward. 


This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and your brain 
runs through these steps in the same order each time. 




First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to initiate a 
behavior. It is a bit of information that predicts a reward. Our 
prehistoric ancestors were paying attention to cues that signaled the 
location of primary rewards like food, water, and sex. Today, we spend 
most of our time learning cues that predict secondary rewards like 
money and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and 
friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction, (Of course, these 
pursuits also indirectly improve our odds of survival and reproduction, 
which is the deeper motive behind everything we do.) 

Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external 
environment for hints of where rewards are located. Because the cue is 
the first indication that we’re close to a reward, it naturally leads to a 
craving. 

Cravings are the second step, and they are the motivational force 
behind every habit. Without some level of motivation or desire— 
without craving a change—we have no reason to act. What you crave is 
not the habit itself but the change in state it delivers. You do not crave 
smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of relief it provides. You are 
not motivated by brushing your teeth but rather by the feeling of a 
clean mouth. You do not want to turn on the television, you want to be 
entertained. Every craving is linked to a desire to change your internal 
state. This is an important point that we will discuss in detail later. 

Cravings differ from person to person. In theory, any piece of 
information could trigger a craving, but in practice, people are not 
motivated by the same cues. For a gambler, the sound of slot machines 
can be a potent trigger that sparks an intense wave of desire. For 
someone who rarely gambles, the jingles and chimes of the casino are 
just background noise. Cues are meaningless until they are interpreted. 
The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the observer are what 
transform a cue into a craving. 

The third step is the response. The response is the actual habit you 
perform, which can take the form of a thought or an action. Whether a 
response occurs depends on how motivated you are and how much 
friction is associated with the behavior. If a particular action requires 
more physical or mental effort than you are willing to expend, then you 
won’t do it. Your response also depends on your ability. It sounds 
simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable of doing it. If you 



want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump high enough to reach the 
hoop, well, you’re out of luck. 

Finally, the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the end goal of 
every habit. The cue is about noticing the reward. The craving is about 
wanting the reward. The response is about obtaining the reward. We 
chase rewards because they serve two purposes: (i) they satisfy us and 
(2) they teach us. 

The first purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving. Yes, rewards 
provide benefits on their own. Food and water deliver the energy you 
need to survive. Getting a promotion brings more money and respect. 
Getting in shape improves your health and your dating prospects. But 
the more immediate benefit is that rewards satisfy your craving to eat 
or to gain status or to win approval. At least for a moment, rewards 
deliver contentment and relief from craving. 

Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth remembering in 
the future. Your brain is a reward detector. As you go about your life, 
your sensory nervous system is continuously monitoring which actions 
satisfy your desires and deliver pleasure. Feelings of pleasure and 
disappointment are part of the feedback mechanism that helps your 
brain distinguish useful actions from useless ones. Rewards close the 
feedback loop and complete the habit cycle. 

If a behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not 
become a habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit will never start. 
Reduce the craving and you won’t experience enough motivation to 
act. Make the behavior difficult and you won’t be able to do it. And if 
the reward fails to satisfy your desire, then you’ll have no reason to do 
it again in the future. Without the first three steps, a behavior will not 
occur. Without all four, a behavior will not be repeated. 


THE HABIT LOOP 




FIGURE 6: The four stages of habit are best described as a feedback loop. 
They form an endless cycle that is running every moment you are alive. This 
“habit loop” is continually scanning the environment, predicting what will 
happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results.! 


In summary, the cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response, 
which provides a reward, which satisfies the craving and, ultimately, 
becomes associated with the cue. Together, these four steps form a 
neurological feedback loop—cue, craving, response, reward; cue, 
craving, response, reward—that ultimately allows you to create 
automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit loop. 

This four-step process is not something that happens occasionally, 
but rather it is an endless feedback loop that is running and active 
during every moment you are alive—even now. The brain is continually 
scanning the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying 
out different responses, and learning from the results. The entire 
process is completed in a split second, and we use it again and again 
without realizing everything that has been packed into the previous 
moment. 

We can split these four steps into two phases: the problem phase 
and the solution phase. The problem phase includes the cue and the 
craving, and it is when you realize that something needs to change. The 
solution phase includes the response and the reward, and it is when 
you take action and achieve the change you desire. 




Problem phase 



All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem. Sometimes 
the problem is that you notice something good and you want to obtain 
it. Sometimes the problem is that you are experiencing pain and you 
want to relieve it. Either way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the 
problems you face. 

In the table on the following page, you can see a few examples of 
what this looks like in real life. 

Imagine walking into a dark room and flipping on the light switch. 
You have performed this simple habit so many times that it occurs 
without thinking. You proceed through all four stages in the fraction of 
a second. The urge to act strikes you without thinking. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: Your phone buzzes with a new text message. 

2. Craving: You want to learn the contents of the message. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You grab your phone and read the text. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to read the message. Grabbing your phone becomes 

associated with your phone buzzing. 

I I 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You are answering emails. 

2. Craving: You begin to feel stressed and overwhelmed by work. You want to feel in control. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You bite your nails. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to reduce stress. Biting your nails becomes associated 

with answering email. 

I I 



Solution phase 































3. Response: You drink a cup of coffee. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel alert. Drinking coffee becomes associated with 

waking up. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the street near your office. 

2. Craving: You begin to crave a doughnut. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You buy a doughnut and eat it. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut becomes 

associated with walking down the street near your office. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You hit a stumbling block on a project at work. 

2. Craving: You feel stuck and want to relieve your frustration. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You pull out your phone and check social media. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel relieved. Checking social media becomes 

associated with feeling stalled at work. 

I I 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You walk into a dark room. 

2. Craving: You want to be able to see. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You flip the light switch. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to see. Turning on the light switch becomes associated 

with being in a dark room. 

By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the habits that are 
running our lives. Most of us never give a second thought to the fact 
that we tie the same shoe first each morning, or unplug the toaster 
after each use, or always change into comfortable clothes after getting 
home from work. After decades of mental programming, we 
automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and acting. 


THE FOUR LAWS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE 

In the following chapters, we will see time and again how the four 
stages of cue, craving, response, and reward influence nearly 
everything we do each day. But before we do that, we need to 





























transform these four steps into a practical framework that we can use 
to design good habits and eliminate bad ones. 

I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior Change, and 
it provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and breaking 
bad ones. You can think of each law as a lever that influences human 
behavior. When the levers are in the right positions, creating good 
habits is effortless. When they are in the wrong positions, it is nearly 
impossible. 


How to Create a Good Habit 


The 1st law (Cue): Make it obvious. 

The 2nd law (Craving): Make it attractive. 

The 3rd law (Response): Make it easy. 

The 4th law (Reward): Make it satisfying. 

We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit. 

I I 


How to Break a Bad Habit 


Inversion of the 1st law (Cue): Make it invisible. 

Inversion of the 2nd law (Craving): Make it unattractive. 

Inversion of the 3rd law (Response): Make it difficult. 

Inversion of the 4th law (Reward): Make it unsatisfying. 

It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four laws are an 
exhaustive framework for changing any human behavior, but I think 
they’re close. As you will soon see, the Four Laws of Behavior Change 
apply to nearly every field, from sports to politics, art to medicine, 
comedy to management. These laws can be used no matter what 
challenge you are facing. There is no need for completely different 
strategies for each habit. 

Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask 
yourself: 

1. How can I make it obvious? 

2. How can I make it attractive? 

3. How can I make it easy? 

4. How can I make it satisfying? 












If you have ever wondered, “Why don’t I do what I say I’m going to 
do? Why don’t I lose the weight or stop smoking or save for retirement 
or start that side business? Why do I say something is important but 
never seem to make time for it?” The answers to those questions can be 
found somewhere in these four laws. The key to creating good habits 
and breaking bad ones is to understand these fundamental laws and 
how to alter them to your specifications. Every goal is doomed to fail if 
it goes against the grain of human nature. 

Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the chapters 
that follow, we will discuss these laws one by one and show how you 
can use them to create a system in which good habits emerge naturally 
and bad habits wither away. 

Chapter Summary 

■ A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to 
become automatic. 

■ The ultimate purpose of habits is to solve the problems of life with 
as little energy and effort as possible. 

■ Any habit can be broken down into a feedback loop that involves 
four steps: cue, craving, response, and reward. 

■ The Four Laws of Behavior Change are a simple set of rules we 
can use to build better habits. They are (i) make it obvious, (2) 
make it attractive, (3) make it easy, and (4) make it satisfying. 



THE 1ST LAW 


Make It Obvious 


4 


The Man Who Didn’t Look Right 

The psychologist Gary Klein once told me a story about a woman who 
attended a family gathering. She had spent years working as a 
paramedic and, upon arriving at the event, took one look at her father- 
in-law and got very concerned. 

“I don’t like the way you look,” she said. 

Her father-in-law, who was feeling perfectly fine, jokingly replied, 
“Well, I don’t like your looks, either.” 

“No,” she insisted. “You need to go to the hospital now.” 

A few hours later, the man was undergoing lifesaving surgery after 
an examination had revealed that he had a blockage to a major artery 
and was at immediate risk of a heart attack. Without his daughter-in- 
law’s intuition, he could have died. 

What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his impending 
heart attack? 

When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on sending 
blood to critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the 
surface of the skin. The result is a change in the pattern of distribution 
of blood in the face. After many years of working with people with 
heart failure, the woman had unknowingly developed the ability to 
recognize this pattern on sight. She couldn’t explain what it was that 
she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she knew something was 
wrong. 

Similar stories exist in other fields. For example, military analysts 
can identify which blip on a radar screen is an enemy missile and 


which one is a plane from their own fleet even though they are 
traveling at the same speed, flying at the same altitude, and look 
identical on radar in nearly every respect. During the Gulf War, 
Lieutenant Commander Michael Riley saved an entire battleship when 
he ordered a missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly 
like the battleship’s own planes on radar. He made the right call, but 
even his superior officers couldn’t explain how he did it. 

Museum curators have been known to discern the difference 
between an authentic piece of art and an expertly produced counterfeit 
even though they can’t tell you precisely which details tipped them off. 
Experienced radiologists can look at a brain scan and predict the area 
where a stroke will develop before any obvious signs are visible to the 
untrained eye. I’ve even heard of hairdressers noticing whether a client 
is pregnant based only on the feel of her hair. 

The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking 
in your surroundings and analyzing the information it comes across. 
Whenever you experience something repeatedly—like a paramedic 
seeing the face of a heart attack patient or a military analyst seeing a 
missile on a radar screen—your brain begins noticing what is 
important, sorting through the details and highlighting the relevant 
cues, and cataloging that information for future use. 

With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict 
certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it. Automatically, 
your brain encodes the lessons learned through experience. We can’t 
always explain what it is we are learning, but learning is happening all 
along the way, and your ability to notice the relevant cues in a given 
situation is the foundation for every habit you have. 

We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can do without 
thinking. You do not tell your hair to grow, your heart to pump, your 
lungs to breathe, or your stomach to digest. And yet your body handles 
all this and more on autopilot. You are much more than your conscious 
self. 

Consider hunger. How do you know when you’re hungry? You don’t 
necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to realize that it is time 
to eat. Appetite and hunger are governed nonconsciously. Your body 
has a variety of feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time 
to eat again and that track what is going on around you and within you. 
Cravings can arise thanks to hormones and chemicals circulating 



through your body. Suddenly, you’re hungry even though you’re not 
quite sure what tipped you off. 

This is one of the most surprising insights about our habits: you 
don’t need to be aware of the cue for a habit to begin. You can notice an 
opportunity and take action without dedicating conscious attention to 
it. This is what makes habits useful. 

It’s also what makes them dangerous. As habits form, your actions 
come under the direction of your automatic and nonconscious mind. 
You fall into old patterns before you realize what’s happening. Unless 
someone points it out, you may not notice that you cover your mouth 
with your hand whenever you laugh, that you apologize before asking a 
question, or that you have a habit of finishing other people’s sentences. 
And the more you repeat these patterns, the less likely you become to 
question what you’re doing and why you’re doing it. 

I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut up empty gift 
cards after customers had used up the balance on the card. One day, 
the clerk cashed out a few customers in a row who purchased with gift 
cards. When the next person walked up, the clerk swiped the 
customer’s actual credit card, picked up the scissors, and then cut it in 
half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at the stunned customer 
and realizing what had just happened. 

Another woman I came across in my research was a former 
preschool teacher who had switched to a corporate job. Even though 
she was now working with adults, her old habits would kick in and she 
kept asking coworkers if they had washed their hands after going to the 
bathroom. I also found the story of a man who had spent years 
working as a lifeguard and would occasionally yell “Walk!” whenever 
he saw a child running. 

Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so common that 
they are essentially invisible: the treats on the kitchen counter, the 
remote control next to the couch, the phone in our pocket. Our 
responses to these cues are so deeply encoded that it may feel like the 
urge to act comes from nowhere. For this reason, we must begin the 
process of behavior change with awareness. 

Before we can effectively build new habits, we need to get a handle 
on our current ones. This can be more challenging than it sounds 
because once a habit is firmly rooted in your life, it is mostly 



nonconscious and automatic. If a habit remains mindless, you can’t 
expect to improve it. As the psychologist Carl Jung said, “Until you 
make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will 
call it fate.” 


THE HABITS SCORECARD 

The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best in the 
world. If you ever find yourself riding a train in Tokyo, you’ll notice 
that the conductors have a peculiar habit. 

As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a ritual of 
pointing at different objects and calling out commands. When the train 
approaches a signal, the operator will point at it and say, “Signal is 
green.” As the train pulls into and out of each station, the operator will 
point at the speedometer and call out the exact speed. When it’s time 
to leave, the operator will point at the timetable and state the time. Out 
on the platform, other employees are performing similar actions. 
Before each train departs, staff members will point along the edge of 
the platform and declare, “All clear!” Every detail is identified, pointed 
at, and named aloud.* 

This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling, is a safety system 
designed to reduce mistakes. It seems silly, but it works incredibly 
well. Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors by up to 85 percent and cuts 
accidents by 30 percent. The MTA subway system in New York City 
adopted a modified version that is “point-only,” and “within two years 
of implementation, incidents of incorrectly berthed subways fell 57 
percent.” 

Pointing-and-Calling is so effective because it raises the level of 
awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level. 
Because the train operators must use their eyes, hands, mouth, and 
ears, they are more likely to notice problems before something goes 
wrong. 

My wife does something similar. Whenever we are preparing to 
walk out the door for a trip, she verbally calls out the most essential 
items in her packing list. “I’ve got my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got 
my glasses. I’ve got my husband.” 


The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely we are to 
consciously think about it. And when we’ve done something a 
thousand times before, we begin to overlook things. We assume that 
the next time will be just like the last. We’re so used to doing what 
we’ve always done that we don’t stop to question whether it’s the right 
thing to do at all. Many of our failures in performance are largely 
attributable to a lack of self-awareness. 

One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is maintaining 
awareness of what we are actually doing. This helps explain why the 
consequences of bad habits can sneak up on us. We need a “point-and- 
call” system for our personal lives. That’s the origin of the Habits 
Scorecard, which is a simple exercise you can use to become more 
aware of your behavior. To create your own, make a list of your daily 
habits. 

Here’s a sample of where your list might start: 

■ Wake up 

■ Turn off alarm 

■ Check my phone 

■ Go to the bathroom 

■ Weigh myself 

■ Take a shower 

■ Brush my teeth 